In this lecture, we are going to learn about structure and record fields in Jenkins file.
All right, let's get started.
This is the overall structure of the Jenkins file.
All the code is inside the pipeline block.
And this pipeline block only appears for declarative pipelines.
For scripted pipeline, we don't have this pipeline syntax.
But like I said, declarative pipeline is the best way to go about writing Jenkins file.
So that's what we are going to learn.
The Jenkins file syntax is actually groovy syntax.
And in case if you are thinking, man, should I go learn groovy.
Now relax.
No need to learn groovy.
Actually, if you are thinking about learning groovy for Jenkins file, please do not.
Groovy has very limited amount of real world applications.
So if you do want to learn a programming language, learn Python, Node.js or go instead, the first
required parameter of Jenkins file is agent.
Agent determines where is this pipeline or the stages going to run.
Maybe you want to execute this Jenkins file in a particular easy to work or not.
Or maybe you want to execute it inside a particular container image.
Maybe you want to build your own container image and then run the stages inside it.
In this case, I'm providing a Docker image along with the label, and that's where the whole pipeline
is going to run.
In this case, instead of giving a Docker container image, we are actually creating the container in
using a Docker file inside this agent block in this example, not that the agent is none at the top.
That means you have to specify agents for each of the stages.
So for this stage, the agent is a Docker for Maven, and the next stage the agent is a Docker for open
JDK.
And if you want your Jenkins job to run in a specific node with a specific level, for example, as
part of your Jenkins infrastructure, you have some windows easy to work node, some Linux, easy to
work on nodes.
And for that particular Jenkins job, you want to submit it to a Windows node so you can do that using
this level.
But for most cases, for all intents and purposes, you will probably be using agent as any.
That means that Jenkins job can run in any available agent.
In our case, we are running Jenkins in easy to work nodes, so the Jenkins job will simply run on those
worker nodes.
Now let's focus on the next required parameter stages.
This is the meat and potato for Jenkins file.
The block stages contains a sequence of one or more stage.
At minimum, the stages should contain at least one stage section.
So in this case, the Jenkins file have three stages build, test and deploy.
And inside this stage section, you will have steps.
Your actual executable lines will be inside this step section.
In this case, I'm just echoing, building, testing and deploying from three different stages.
But think of it as you can run shell script and SQL commands.
Anything inside these steps block So create as many stage as required and all executable command goes
inside steps.
All right.
So it's probably easier to see this in action than to understand this while going through the theory.
So let's jump into Jenkins and find out how this particular Jenkins file runs in our job.